A mild September afternoon, thirty years ago, in the middle of Galway
Bay.

Clouds over the whole expanse of sky, nowhere showing any immediate
disposition to fall as rain, yet nowhere allowing the sky to appear
decidedly, nowhere even becoming themselves decided, keeping everywhere
a broad indefinable wash of greyness, a grey so dim, uniform, and
all-pervasive, that it defied observation, floating and melting away
into a dimly blotted horizon, an horizon which, whether at any given
point to call sea or sky, land or water, it was all but impossible to
decide.

Here and there in that wide cloud-covered sweep of sky a sort of break
or window occurred, and through this break or window long shafts of
sunlight fell in a cold and chastened drizzle, now upon the bluish
levels of crestless waves, now upon the bleak untrodden corner of some
portion of the coast of Clare, tilted perpendicularly upwards; now
perhaps again upon that low line of islands which breaks the outermost
curve of the bay of Galway, and beyond which is nothing, nothing, that
is to say, but the Atlantic, a region which, despite the ploughing of
innumerable keels, is still given up by the dwellers of those islands to
a mystic condition of things unknown to geographers, but too deeply
rooted in their consciousness to yield to any mere reports from
without.

One of these momentary shafts of light had just caught in its passage
upon the sails of a fishing smack or hooker, Con O'Malley's hooker, from
the middle isle of Aran. It was an old, battered, much-enduring sail of
indeterminate hue, inclining to coffee colour, and patched towards the
top with a large patch of a different shade and much newer material. The
hooker itself was old, too, and patched, but still seaworthy, and, as
the only hooker at that time belonging to the islands, a source, as all
Inishmaan knew, of unspeakable pride and satisfaction to its owner.

At present its only occupants were Con himself and his little
eleven-year-old daughter, Grania. There was, however, a smaller boat
belonging to it a few yards away, which had been detached a short while
before for the convenience of fishing. The occupants of this smaller
boat were two also, a lad of about fourteen, well grown, light haired,
fairly well to do, despite the raggedness of his clothes, which in
Ireland is no especial test of poverty. The other was a man of about
twenty-eight or thirty, the raggedness of whose clothes was of the
absolute rather than comparative order. The face, too, above the rags
was rather wilder, more unsettled, more restless than even West
Connaught recognises as customary or becoming. Nay, if you chose to
consider it critically, you might have called it a dangerous face, not
ugly, handsome rather, as far as the features went, and lit by a pair of
eyes so dark as to be almost black, but with a restlessly moving lower
jaw, a quantity of hair raked into a tangled mass over an excessively
low brow, and the eyes themselves were sombre, furtive, menacing--the
eyes of a wolf or other beast of prey--eyes which by moments seemed to
flash upon you like something sinister seen suddenly at dead of night.
Shan Daly, Shan the vagabond'--he was commonly
called by his neighbours, and he certainly looked the character.

Even this man's fashion of fishing had something in it of the same
furtive and predatory character. Fishing, no doubt, is a predatory
pursuit; still, if any predatory pursuit can be said to be legalised or
sanctified, it surely is. Shan Daly's manner of fishing, however,
carried no biblical suggestions with it. Every time his line neared the
surface with a fish attached, he clutched at it with a sudden clawing
gesture, expressive of fierce, hungry desire, his lips moving, his eyes
glittering, his whole face working. Even when the fish had been cleared
from the line and lay in a scaly heap at the bottom of the boat, his
looks still followed them with the same peculiarly hungry expression.
Watching him at such a moment you would hardly have been surprised had
you seen him suddenly begin to devour them, then and there, scales and
all, as an otter might have done.

For more than an hour the light western breeze which had carried the
hooker so rapidly to Ballyvaughan that morning, with its load of kelp,
had been gradually dying away, until now it was all but gone. Far and
wide, too, not a sign of its revival appeared. Schools of gulls rose and
dipped in circles here and there upon the surface of the water, their
screams, now harsh and ear-piercing, now faint and rendered almost
inaudible by distance. A few other fishing boats lay becalmed at widely
separated points in the broad circumference, and, where the two lines of
coast, converging rapidly towards one another, met at Galway, a big
merchantman was seen slowly moving into harbour in the wake of a small
tug, the trail of whose smoke lay behind it, a long coal-black thread
upon the satiny surface.

Leaning against the taffrail of his vessel, Con O'Malley puffed lazily
at his pipe, and watched the smoke disappearing in thin concentric
circles, his brawny shoulders, already bent, less from age than from an
inveterate habit of slouching and leaning showing massively against that
watery background. Opposite, at the further end of the boat, the little
red-petticoated figure of his daughter sat perched upon the top of a
heap of loose stones, which served for the moment as ballast. The day,
as has been said, was calm, but the Atlantic is never an absolutely
passive object. Every now and then a slow sleepy swell would come and
lift the boat upon its shoulders, up one long green watery slope and
down another, setting the heap of stones rolling and grinding one
against the other. Whenever this happened the little figure upon the
ballast would get temporarily dislodged from its perch, and sent
rolling, now to one side, now to the other, according as the boat moved,
or the loose freight shifted its position. The next moment, however,
with a quick scrambling action, like that of some small marmoset or
squirrel, it would have clambered up again to its former place; its feet
would have wedged themselves securely into a new position against the
stones, the small mouth opening to display a row of white teeth with a
laugh of triumphant glee at its own achievement.

A wild little face, and a wild little figure! Bare-headed, with unkempt
hair tossing in a brown mane over face and neck; a short red flannel
petticoat barely reaching to the knees; another, a whitish one, tied by
the strings cloak-fashion about the shoulders, and tumbling backwards
with every movement. One thing would probably have struck a stranger as
incongruous, and that was the small feet and legs were not, as might
have been expected, bare, but clad in comfortable thick knitted
stockings, with shoes, or rather sandals, of the kind known as
_pampooties_, made of cow's skin, the hair being left on, the upper
portion sewn together and tied with a wisp of wool in more or less
classical fashion across the two small insteps.

Seen against that indeterminate welter of sea and sky, the little brown
face with its rapidly moving glances, strongly marked brows, vividly
tinted colouring, might have brought southern suggestions to your mind.
Small Italian faces have something of that same outline, that flash,
that vividness of colouring: gipsies too. Could the child by any chance,
you might have asked yourself, be a gipsy? But no: a moment's
reflection would have told you it was impossible, for there are no
gipsies, never have been any, in Ireland.

Of course, the real explanation would soon have presented itself to your
mind. It lay in that long-unrenewed, but still-to-be-distinguished
streak of Spanish blood, which comes out, generation after generation,
in so many a West Irish face, a legacy from the days when, to all
intents and purposes, yonder little town was a beleaguered fortress,
dependent for daily necessities upon its boats and the shifting caprice
of the seas; the landways between it and the rest of the island being as
impracticable for all ordinary purposes and ordinary travellers as any
similar extent of mid-Africa to-day.

nimbly up, till she had reached her favourite perch on the top of the
fort, where a small portion of the parapet still existed. Seating
herself upon this she let her feet dangle out over the smooth flagged
platform which stretched for some distance beyond.

She was still sobbing, from anger, however, rather than pain, her
suffering being of the kind known in nursery parlance as a pain in the
temper, the previous vexation about Murdough having been deepened and
brought into fresh prominence by the recent encounter.

Teige O'Shaughnessy was an orphan, and lived with an uncle and aunt, an
old brother and sister who inhabited a cabin upon one of the outlying
rocks, one which became an island at high tide and therefore was then
unapproachable. The two were twins, and earned their bread, or rather
the old man earned it for both of them, by weaving. Apparently it was a
sorry trade, for the cabin in which they lived was so twisted,
sea-battered, brine-encrusted, and generally miserable that, by
comparison, most of the other houses upon the island might have been
regarded by their owners as quite architectural and dignified domiciles.
This, one would say, ought to have been a source of popularity, but, for
several reasons, the O'Shaughnessys were rather pariahs upon Inishmaan.
This was not on account of their poverty, which is never a really
damning reproach in Ireland, and probably, therefore, was due partly to
the fact that, compared to most of its inhabitants, they were
new-comers--at least, there were several very old people on Inishmaan
who pretended to remember a time when there were no O'Shaughnessys
there--partly to their extreme ill-favouredness, and, still more, to the
fact that the two old people were deaf and dumb, and could therefore
only communicate with their neighbours and the rest of the world by
signs--a sufficient reason surely in a much less superstitious
community than that of Inishmaan for regarding them as lying peculiarly
under the disfavour of Heaven, and likely enough to bring that contagion
or blight of disfavour upon other, and more fortunate, people if unduly
encouraged and associated with.

Grania, a born aristocrat--all children are born aristocrats--shared
this feeling in the strongest degree, and was well aware that Teige was
in some way or other immensely inferior to herself, and therefore a
person only to be tolerated when no more attractive company was to be
had. She sat for some time longer with her feet dangling over the top of
the fort, a quaint little red-petticoated figure, the solitary spot of
colour in all that desolate greyness. Immediately beneath her the ridged
platforms of rock showed their upturned edges, one below the other,
fluted, worn, and grooved into every variety of furrow. Hardly a speck
of green to be seen anywhere. Here and there an adventurous spray of
honeysuckle or bryony, grown deep in the hollows, showed perhaps a few
inches of foliage above the wrinkled surface of the rocks, but that was
all.

The winds were all hushed for that evening, but their power and prowess
was written at large upon every worn crag, torn fissure, and twisted
stump; upon the whole battered, wind-tormented scene. Inishmaan might
from this point have suggested some weather-beaten old vessel, a raft or
hulk given over to the mercy of winds and waves, keeping afloat still,
but utterly scarred and defaced, a derelict, past all possibility of
recovery.

After sitting for about a quarter of an hour upon the same spot, the
child began to tire of her solitary perch. A new impulse seized her,
and, leaving the rath, she clambered down the wall, over the loose
blocks scattered outside--remains of a still discernible _chevaux de
frise_--ran across the level slabs of rock, till she reached the end of
the one she was upon, when she dropped suddenly down-hill, over, as it
were, a single gigantic stair, thereby attaining the one below.

This brought her to a totally different aspect of the island, and,
comparatively speaking, a cheerful and sheltered one. A narrow _coose_,
or horseshoe-shaped bay, running some little way inshore, had created a
sort of small sea-facing amphitheatre, backed by a semicircle of rocks,
at the bottom and sides of which mountain ash, holly, and fuchsia--the
latter still red with flower--grew and flourished, enclosing and
sheltering a small, perfectly level green stage or platform.

At the end of this platform, which served it for a terrace, stood a
house--not a cabin, and the only habitable abode on Inishmaan that could
be called by any other name. It was said to have been built for a
relation of the owner of the islands, who, fifty years before, had found
here an asylum from his creditors. Whatever its history may have been,
it formed undoubtedly an odd contrast to every other form of
architecture to be found in the place. In shape it seemed to have been
intended to imitate some small Greek or Roman temple, the front
consisting of four cut granite pillars supporting a roof, and led up to
by three wide, shallow steps, which steps were also of granite, the
reddish feldspathic granite of West Galway. The back and sides of the
building, however, were only of the ordinary blue limestone of the
island, once plastered with stucco, and white, but long since blistered
and broken away. Damp and decay had, in fact, got possession of the
whole building. Not only had the stucco almost entirely fallen off, but
even the scrolled iron banisters of a flight of steps which led from the
end of the terrace to the sea were in many places worn to a mere thread
by the constant friction of water and rust-producing action of the
spray.

No one lived there now, though an old woman, the grandmother of Murdough
Blake, was paid a trifle for looking after it, and was pretty generally
to be found there in the daytime. With Grama it had always been a chief
haunt and playground, partly because Murdough Blake had a prescriptive
right to go there to dig bait and loaf about generally, but also because
there was a fascination for her in the tumble-down old house itself, so
utterly unlike any other within the range of her experience.

As might have been expected, it was all shut up now; so, having vainly
tried each of the doors and windows, and rapped impatiently at two or
three of them, she went down the steps and squatted disconsolately upon
a bit of rock at the foot of them.

The air, mild as milk, had something about it that evening which seemed
to touch the cheek like a caress. There had been no sunset worth
speaking of, but the western sky and sea above and below the rim of the
horizon were tinged with faint salmon, through which the grey broke, and
into which it was gradually melting. To the north, behind the child's
head, the great grey profile of Dun Conchobhair lifted its frowning
mass, well defined against the sky--a dark, sinister fragment of a
long-forgotten past, looking gloomily down upon the poor, squat, and
weather-worn habitations of to-day.

The sea seemed to have grown curiously small. The 'Old Sea,' as the
islanders call the Atlantic, was here hidden completely out of sight,
and only the sound between the middle and smallest island, with a
fragment of the bay beyond, was visible. To the left lay the remains of
a small pier, where the owner of the villa had once moored his boats,
now broken down and half destroyed by storms. Seagulls floated hither
and thither in the still water, tame as ducks upon a farmyard pool.
Cormorants passed overhead with black outstretched necks, and now and
then the white-barred head of a diver rose for a moment, to disappear
again into the depths of the water the next.

As it grew darker, the shapes of everything began to change, blend, and
melt into one another. The crooked iron supports, bent and red with
rust, took on new and more fantastic forms. They seemed now a company of
spindle-legged imps, writhing, twisting, tugging to right and left, so
as to escape from the weight of what they had undertaken to carry. Red
flakes, fallen from them, lay in all directions upon the ground, mixed
with fragments of black oarweed, like so many twists of old worn-out
tobacco. Everything breathed a dull calm, a half-stupefied melancholy.
The swell slid lazily up one side of the little pier, hiding its stones
and rat-holes for a moment, then fell heavily back again down the other,
with a movement that was almost suggestive of a shrug, a gesture, of
somewhat bored resignation.

For nearly an hour the child sat on and on, heedless of poor Honor's
anxieties, dreaming dim, formless dreams, such as visit alike all young
heads, whatever the measure of so-called education that may have fallen
to the lot of their owners.

She thought over the incidents in the boat that afternoon, and clenched
her two little rows of white teeth afresh at the recollection of Shan
Daly's attack on Murdough. Then she took to wondering where Murdough
was, and whether he was on his way back, a vague dream of floating away
somewhere or other in a boat, only he and she together, rising
blissfully before her mind. A momentary qualm as to Honor came to cross
these delights, quickly dispersed, however, by the reflection that Honor
had her prayers and her cross, and that she really wanted nothing else,
whereas she, Grania, wanted many things, while as for Murdough Blake,
that hero's wants were simply insatiable--grew and multiplied, in fact,
with such rapidity that even his most faithful admirer could hardly keep
pace with them.
